Now we learned about binary heaps and we mentioned that unlike a binary search tree there is no order
from left to right this 33 and 77.
We can swap them and they'll still be a binary cheap.
The beauty of binary heaps is that they take up the least amount of space possible because it's always
left to right insertion as we just saw.
So there's no concept of an unbalanced binary heap.
We don't have to rebalance it like a binary search tree because of this because they do.
Left to right insertion as we saw in the previous video.
They preserve this order of insertion which is pretty amazing right.
And you can actually implement binary heaps using a race versus what we did before with binary search
trees where we used notes.
So the only guarantee that binary heap it gives us is what I mentioned the parent is always greater
than the children now.
Besides being memory efficient and just compact because it's always a complete binary tree binary heaps
are really really useful for things such as priority queues.
And you might be asking yourself priority queue didn't we just learn about queues and isn't that the
same data structure.
Well no because with queues we just assumed that it was first in first up.
You were the first person in line you should get to go first into the rollercoaster or the movie's priority
queue is something different.
It is a type of data where each element has a priority.
And elements with a higher priority are served before elements with larger priorities you can think
of this as a club.
Let's say we have a nightclub that is very very popular and there's a long lineup and we let some people
in everybody's happy.
But then all of a sudden we have some VIP that showed up what they pay a lot more money than the other
customers so we're going to put them in first.
So now we have a different priority.
We're even though they arrived later they get to go when they have higher priority.
Another good example is an emergency room.
You want to treat the patients that have the most severe symptoms or conditions.
Right.
Another way to think about it is let's say we're lining up to get into an airplane.
We have the first person coming in lining up and then all of a sudden the captain shows up and because
the captain should get on the airplane before a normal passenger the captain gets now put as priority
as the root note because the value is higher or at least in this case the value is higher than the passenger.
So let's say a passenger comes on because we're doing left to right insertion.
We put the passenger to the right.
So now we know we're going to let the captain go and then the first passenger.
Then the second passenger Next we have a stewardess that came in.
He or she should get to go before the passengers but not before the captain.
Well in that case once again we place the stewardess below the captain but to the right or to the left
of the passenger and then we have a now there passenger that comes.
We do.
Left to right insertion.
We see a right spot down here.
So we placed them down here.
So we see how everything gets balanced which is nice but it's also really really easy for us to now
lead people into the airplane because we know the order we go from the top then left then right then
left then right left.
Right.
And we just keep going keep going keep going.
We know the priority very easily.
I'm sure you see where this might be useful in a lot of situation.
To review we learned what binary search trees are.
They're great but sometimes binary heaps or priority queues are even better.
Although searching through a binary heap is a lot slower than a binary search tree.
You have an idea of priority because insertion is done in order so you know who should be first who
should be second who should be.
Third and although we might have to bubble up inserts every once in a while if there is somebody that
is has really high priority.
Most of the time you get really fast inserts with binary heaps and as we mentioned lookups are slow
but you want to use binary heaps when you're just interested in finding the max or finding minimum.
If it's a min heap and a lot of the times in binary heaps in priority queues you have a method called
find Max or find men.
That is all of one because you know right away that the top root node is the max or the minimum.
So for those operations it's really really fast and great.
And there you have it.
I'll see you in the next video.
Buh-Bye.